init-1: rework the first part about the kernel initialization (#915)
0xAX/linux-insides: Initialization/linux-initialization-1.md

It may not be obvious why this "trick" even works, so let's look at it more carefully. The offset is computed as:

```
offset = runtime-virtual-address - link-time-virtual-address
```

Since at this point the kernel uses identity-mapped pages, every virtual address equals the corresponding physical address. On the other hand, the virtual address assigned during linking is the address the kernel wants to map to. So the formula above can be rewritten as:

```
physical-address = virtual-address + offset

virtual-address = physical-address - offset
```

This is exactly what we saw above. For example, `common_startup_64` resides at `0x0000000001000dc0` when the kernel is loaded, and was assigned `0xffffffff81000dc0` during linking. The physical-to-virtual offset is:

```python
# Offset
>>> hex((0x0000000001000dc0 - 0xffffffff81000dc0) & 0xffffffffffffffff)
'0x80000000'
```

The conversion between physical and virtual addresses of this symbol using the offset is:

```python
# Physical address
>>> hex((0xffffffff81000dc0 + 0x80000000) & 0xffffffffffffffff)
'0x1000dc0'

# Virtual address
>>> hex((0x0000000001000dc0 - 0x80000000) & 0xffffffffffffffff)
'0xffffffff81000dc0'
```

> This is exactly the technique used at the beginning of the `__startup_64` function to get the physical address corresponding to the base of the kernel's virtual address space denoted by the `phys_base` and the difference between where the kernel was linked to run and where it was actually loaded denoted by the `load_delta`:

Reviewer: This sentence is very long; consider splitting it

```C
	phys_base = load_delta = __START_KERNEL_map + p2v_offset;
```

The same offset is used to get virtual addresses of the beginning and end of the kernel image:

<!-- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/torvalds/linux/refs/heads/master/arch/x86/boot/startup/map_kernel.c#L118-L119 -->
```C
	va_text = physaddr - p2v_offset;
	va_end  = (unsigned long)rip_rel_ptr(_end) - p2v_offset;
```

Now that we understand what `load_delta` means, we can see how the kernel builds the new page tables. The key operation is adjusting each page table entry by adding `load_delta` to fix up the addresses. Let's walk through this.

The base of the new page table is `early_top_pgt` defined in [arch/x86/kernel/head_64.S](https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/master/arch/x86/kernel/head_64.S):

<!-- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/torvalds/linux/refs/heads/master/arch/x86/kernel/head_64.S#L603-L608 -->
```assembly
SYM_DATA_START_PTI_ALIGNED(early_top_pgt)
	.fill	511,8,0
	.quad	level3_kernel_pgt - __START_KERNEL_map + _PAGE_TABLE_NOENC
	.fill	PTI_USER_PGD_FILL,8,0
SYM_DATA_END(early_top_pgt)
SYM_PIC_ALIAS(early_top_pgt)
```

> The first `511` entries of the top level page table are empty and only the last one points to `level3_kernel_pgt`. At first glance you may think that the single entry is not enough, but this perfectly makes sense. Each PGD entry covers 512 GB of memory, and the kernel is mapped in the very last 2 GB of the virtual address space. Entry `511` is exactly the one that covers that memory region. The remaining entries are empty for now, but will be filled in the `__startup_64` function with the identity mapping pages needed for the `cr3` register switch. We will see that a little later, but first comes the adjusting of the top-level page entry:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first `511` entries of the top level page table are empty, and only the last one points to `level3_kernel_pgt`. At first glance, you may think that the single entry is not enough, but this perfectly makes sense. Each PGD entry covers 512 GB of memory, and the kernel is mapped in the very last 2 GB of the virtual address space. Entry `511` is exactly the one that covers that memory region. The remaining entries are empty for now, but will be filled in the `__startup_64` function with the identity mapping pages needed for the `cr3` register switch. We will see that a little later, but first comes the adjusting of the top-level page entry:
```

To understand it better, let's take a look one more time how the 511th entry is defined:

```assembly
	.quad	level3_kernel_pgt - __START_KERNEL_MAP + _PAGE_TABLE_NOENC
```

The `level3_kernel_pgt` here is a link-time virtual address. Subtracting `__START_KERNEL_map` (`0xffffffff80000000`) strips the virtual base, producing an offset that would be the correct physical address only if `__START_KERNEL_map` maps to physical address `0`. At the default load address this is true and `load_delta` is zero. But if [KASLR](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Address_space_layout_randomization#Linux) or another mechanism places the kernel elsewhere, the offset no longer matches the real physical address and `load_delta` corrects it. Considering that `load_delta` is the sum of the `__START_KERNEL_MAP` and the physical-to-virtual offset, the 511th entry of the top-level page table becomes:

```
level3_kernel_pgt - __START_KERNEL_map + _PAGE_TABLE_NOENC + __START_KERNEL_map + p2v_offset
```

Or just:

```
level3_kernel_pgt + p2v_offset + _PAGE_TABLE_NOENC
```

> Which is the physical address of the `level3_kernel_pgt` and its flags. This is exactly what must be placed in a page table entry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the physical address of the `level3_kernel_pgt` and its flags, and that's exactly what must be placed in a page table entry.
```

```C
	level3_kernel_pgt[PTRS_PER_PUD - 2].pud += load_delta;
	level3_kernel_pgt[PTRS_PER_PUD - 1].pud += load_delta;
```

Now we reach the bottom level - `level2_kernel_pgt`. Here the kernel does something different. Instead of just fixing up all entries, it only adjusts the ones that actually cover the kernel image, and invalidates everything else:

<!-- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/torvalds/linux/refs/heads/master/arch/x86/boot/startup/map_kernel.c#L201-L214 -->
```C
	pmd = rip_rel_ptr(level2_kernel_pgt);

	/* invalidate pages before the kernel image */
	for (i = 0; i < pmd_index(va_text); i++)
		pmd[i] &= ~_PAGE_PRESENT;

	/* fixup pages that are part of the kernel image */
	for (; i <= pmd_index(va_end); i++)
		if (pmd[i] & _PAGE_PRESENT)
			pmd[i] += load_delta;

	/* invalidate pages after the kernel image */
	for (; i < PTRS_PER_PMD; i++)
		pmd[i] &= ~_PAGE_PRESENT;
```

The fixmap entries also need their `load_delta` adjustment:

<!-- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/torvalds/linux/refs/heads/master/arch/x86/boot/startup/map_kernel.c#L139-L140 -->
```C
	for (i = FIXMAP_PMD_TOP; i > FIXMAP_PMD_TOP - FIXMAP_PMD_NUM; i--)
		level2_fixmap_pgt[i].pmd += load_delta;
```

> At this point, the high-memory kernel mapping is complete. But if the kernel would try to switch to these page tables right now, things would immediately go wrong. The CPU is still executing at a low physical address while the kernel just built page tables that do not map it. The very next instruction fetch after updating the page tables would trigger a [page fault](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Page_fault), and the kernel has no handler ready to catch it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point, the high-memory kernel mapping is complete. But if the kernel would try to switch to these page tables right now, things would immediately go wrong. The CPU is still running at a low physical address while the kernel has just built page tables that do not map it. The very next instruction fetch after updating the page tables would trigger a [page fault](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Page_fault), and the kernel has no handler ready to catch it.
```

> To avoid this problem, the kernel needs to build a temporary identity mapping page tables. By also mapping the low physical address range where the CPU is currently executing, the kernel makes sure that both the old address (where execution is right now) and the new high address (where the kernel should be mapped) are valid at the moment of the switch. Once the kernel jumps to its high virtual address, this identity mapping will have served its purpose and can be discarded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To avoid this problem, the kernel needs to build a temporary identity mapping page tables. By also mapping the low physical address range where the CPU is currently running, the kernel makes sure that both the old address (where execution is right now) and the new high address (where the kernel should be mapped) are valid at the moment of the switch. Once the kernel jumps to its high virtual address, this identity mapping will have served its purpose and can be discarded.
```

## Completing the transition to kernel address space

With the new kernel page tables ready, the `__startup_64` function returns and we arrive at [`common_startup_64`](https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/master/arch/x86/kernel/head_64.S). Now the kernel loads `cr3` with the address of `early_top_pgt`, activating the new page tables. The moment this write happens, every memory access, including the fetch of the next instruction, goes through the new page tables. This is exactly why the kernel still needs the identity mapping. Without it, the CPU would fault on the very next instruction fetch.

After switching to the new page table, the old [TLB](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Translation_lookaside_buffer) entries are stale now. If a stale entry were used, the CPU would silently translate an address to the wrong physical location. So the kernel needs to flush the TLB.

> The standard way to do this on x86_64 is to toggle the `PGE` (Page Global Enable) bit in the `cr4` [control register](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Control_register). Clearing this bit invalidates all global TLB entries, and setting it back re-enables global translations with fresh entries from the new page tables. But `cr4` contains many other important bits, so the kernel cannot just zero the whole register. It first builds a mask of the bits that must survive the flush: 

Reviewer: How is the list related to the previous paragraph? Are these the bits you mention in the last sentence? In this case, I would add something like "These bits are:"  and then list.

<img width="996" height="206" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/bf65d6e0-e779-4442-b26a-a40f4a576ca6" />

## Conclusion

This is the end of the first part about the initialization process of the Linux kernel. If you have questions or suggestions, feel free to ping me on X - [0xAX](https://twitter.com/0xAX), drop me an [email](mailto:anotherworldofworld@gmail.com), or just create an [issue](https://github.com/0xAX/linux-insides/issues/new).

In the next part, we will continue to dive into this interesting process and will see the continuation of the x86_64 architecture-specific initialization before the kernel jumps to the "generic" entry point - `start_kernel`.

## Links

> Here is the list of the links that you may find useful during reading of this chapter:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is the list of the links that you may find useful when reading this chapter:
```

- [Linux kernel boot process](https://github.com/0xAX/linux-insides/tree/master/Booting)
- [Real mode](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Real_mode)
- [Protected mode](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Protected_mode)
- [Long mode](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Long_mode)
- [GNU linker documentation](https://ftp.gnu.org/old-gnu/Manuals/ld-2.9.1/html_node/ld_21.html)
- [Paging](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Memory_paging)
- [model-specific register](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Model-specific_register)

> - [control register](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Control_register)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Model-specific register](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Model-specific_register)
- [Control register](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Control_register)
```

# Linux kernel initialization - Part 1

> The previous [post](https://github.com/0xAX/linux-insides/blob/master/Booting/linux-bootstrap-6.md) was the final part of the chapter describing the [Linux kernel boot process](https://github.com/0xAX/linux-insides/tree/master/Booting). In that chapter, we looked at the kernel boot process path step by step, starting from the very first actions and instructions executed after the system powers on, through the bootloader, and finally into the Linux kernel setup code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The previous [post](https://github.com/0xAX/linux-insides/blob/master/Booting/linux-bootstrap-6.md) was the final part of the chapter describing the [Linux kernel boot process](https://github.com/0xAX/linux-insides/tree/master/Booting). In that chapter, we looked at the kernel boot process step by step, starting from the very first actions and instructions executed after the system powers on, through the bootloader, and finally into the Linux kernel setup code.
```

Now we are entering the next stage of the journey - the initialization of the Linux kernel. The CPU has switched modes, the temporary page tables have been built, and the kernel image has been decompressed, placed at its final location in memory, and the control was passed to it. But the kernel is in a very early state. It is running on simple identity-mapped page tables and a temporary GDT inherited from the early setup code. It must rebuild all of these structures before it can continue.

All upcoming parts of this chapter will be dedicated to exploring how the kernel initializes itself before launching the very first userspace process with [PID 1](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Process_identifier). It can be hard to believe, but even after all the code we have already seen, there is still a lot to do. The kernel must initialize all core subsystems, finish setting up memory management, detect hardware, load drivers for it, and perform many other tasks before userspace code will be able to run.

> Our journey begins at the kernel entry point located in [arch/x86/kernel/head_64.S](https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/master/arch/x86/kernel/head_64.S). From there we will move step by step through the early initialization code, looking at the first actions performed by the kernel, including:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our journey begins at the kernel entry point located in [arch/x86/kernel/head_64.S](https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/master/arch/x86/kernel/head_64.S). From there, we will move step by step through the early initialization code, looking at the first actions performed by the kernel, including:
```

<!-- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/torvalds/linux/refs/heads/master/arch/x86/boot/compressed/head_64.S#L469-L475 -->
```assembly
	call	extract_kernel		/* returns kernel entry point in %rax */

/*
 * Jump to the decompressed kernel.
 */
	movq	%r15, %rsi
	jmp	*%rax
```

In other words, control has now been transferred from the temporary decompressor environment to the actual Linux kernel code.

The entry point of the decompressed kernel image is `startup_64`, defined in [arch/x86/kernel/head_64.S](https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/master/arch/x86/kernel/head_64.S):

<!-- https://github.com/torvalds/linux/raw/refs/heads/master/arch/x86/kernel/head_64.S#L36-L38 -->
```assembly
	__INIT
	.code64
SYM_CODE_START_NOALIGN(startup_64)
```

> It is placed in the `.init.text` section by the `__INIT` macro. This section will exists only during early initialization and as soon as the kernel will finish the initialization process, it will be freed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is placed in the `.init.text` section by the `__INIT` macro. This section will exist only during early initialization, and as soon as the kernel finishes the initialization process, it will be freed.
```

```bash
printf "0x%x\n" $(( $(nm vmlinux | grep -w "startup_64" | cut -d' ' -f1 | sed 's/^/0x/') - 0xffffffff80000000 ))
0x2e9f1b0
```

The addresses match, so `startup_64` is indeed the entry point.

The very first thing the kernel does is save the pointer to the `boot_params` structure in the `r15` register to preserve it for later use:

<!-- https://github.com/torvalds/linux/raw/refs/heads/master/arch/x86/kernel/head_64.S#L59-L59 -->
```assembly
	mov	%rsi, %r15
```

Now the kernel needs a stack. Without a valid stack, the kernel cannot use `push`, `pop`, or `call` instructions. This means no C function calls and no interrupt handling. Until the stack is ready, the kernel is limited to simple register operations. To set up the stack, the kernel puts the address of the `__top_init_kernel_stack` into the stack pointer:

<!-- https://github.com/torvalds/linux/raw/refs/heads/master/arch/x86/kernel/head_64.S#L62-L62 -->
```assembly
	leaq	__top_init_kernel_stack(%rip), %rsp
```

> It points not just at a random address, but belongs to the init task, the very first kernel thread (PID 0), which will eventually become the idle process. The stack is `16384` bytes size and its top is defined in the kernel image by the [linker script](https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/master/arch/x86/kernel/vmlinux.lds.S). The `__top_init_kernel_stack` symbol is defined as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It points not just at a random address, but belongs to the init task, the very first kernel thread (PID 0), which will eventually become the idle process. The stack is `16384` bytes in size, and its top is defined in the kernel image by the [linker script](https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/master/arch/x86/kernel/vmlinux.lds.S). The `__top_init_kernel_stack` symbol is defined as:
```

<!-- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/torvalds/linux/refs/heads/master/arch/x86/kernel/vmlinux.lds.S#L183-L183 -->
```linker-script
		__top_init_kernel_stack = __end_init_stack - TOP_OF_KERNEL_STACK_PADDING - PTREGS_SIZE;
```

> The two subtractions reserve space at the very top of the stack:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Two subtractions reserve space at the very top of the stack:
```

- `TOP_OF_KERNEL_STACK_PADDING` - currently reserved for [Intel FRED](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/content-details/779982/flexible-return-and-event-delivery-fred-specification.html)
- `PTREGS_SIZE` - leaves room for the register frame that gets pushed during interrupt handling

> With the stack ready, the kernel can now call functions and handle interrupts. But there is one more thing to clean up before moving on. The `gs` register is used by the kernel to access [per-CPU data structures](../Concepts/linux-cpu-1.md). Right now, it may still contain whatever value the decompressor left. If that garbage value were used as a base for a per-CPU access, the kernel would read from or write to some wrong memory location. So the kernel zeroes it out:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the stack ready, the kernel can now call functions and handle interrupts. But there is one more thing to clean up before moving on. The kernel uses the `gs` register to access [per-CPU data structures](../Concepts/linux-cpu-1.md). Right now, it may still contain whatever value the decompressor left. If that garbage value were used as a base for a per-CPU access, the kernel would read from or write to the wrong memory location. So the kernel zeroes it out:
```

Despite this, the kernel still loads the following segment descriptors:

- `GDT_ENTRY_KERNEL_CS` - The kernel code segment.
- `GDT_ENTRY_KERNEL_DS` - The kernel data segment, mainly used for stack access.
- `GDT_ENTRY_KERNEL32_CS` - The 32-bit kernel segment used when switching to protected mode, for example during reboot, switching between four-level and five-level page tables, or booting secondary CPUs.
- `GDT_ENTRY_DEFAULT_USER_CS` - The userspace code segment.
- `GDT_ENTRY_DEFAULT_USER_DS` - The userspace data segment, used for stack and data segment access.
- `GDT_ENTRY_DEFAULT_USER32_CS` - The 32-bit userspace segment used for running 32-bit userspace programs.

The main reason to load these descriptors is how they are used in long mode. Although the base and limit values of the code segment are ignored and no longer used for address calculations, the other fields still function normally. For example, privilege checks are still performed.

> The new Global Descriptor Table is loaded by the following call:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following call loads the new Global Descriptor Table:
```

<!-- https://github.com/torvalds/linux/raw/refs/heads/master/arch/x86/kernel/head_64.S#L62-L62 -->
```assembly
	call	__pi_startup_64_setup_gdt_idt
```

> Before we look at this function, there is a interesting detail about how it is called. You will not find its definition if you try to grep the Linux kernel source code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before we look at this function, there is an interesting detail about how it is called. You will not find its definition if you try to grep the Linux kernel source code:
```

```bash
rg __pi_startup_64_setup_gdt_idt
arch/x86/kernel/head_64.S
74:	call	__pi_startup_64_setup_gdt_idt
```

The actual definition of this function we can find in [arch/x86/boot/startup/gdt_idt.c](https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/master/arch/x86/boot/startup/gdt_idt.c), but it will be without the `__pi_` prefix:

<!-- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/torvalds/linux/refs/heads/master/arch/x86/boot/startup/gdt_idt.c#L49-L49 -->
```C
void __init startup_64_setup_gdt_idt(void)
```

All symbols from the [arch/x86/boot/startup](https://github.com/torvalds/linux/tree/master/arch/x86/boot/startup) directory are prefixed with `__pi_` using `objcopy`:

<!-- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/torvalds/linux/refs/heads/master/arch/x86/boot/startup/Makefile#L42-L49 -->
```make
# Confine the startup code by prefixing all symbols with __pi_ (for position
# independent). This ensures that startup code can only call other startup
# code, or code that has explicitly been made accessible to it via a symbol
# alias.
#
$(obj)/%.pi.o: OBJCOPYFLAGS := --prefix-symbols=__pi_
$(obj)/%.pi.o: $(obj)/%.o FORCE
	$(call if_changed,objcopy)
```

> This is done to prevent the compiler from generating any absolute address references. As you can remember from the last parts of the previous chapter, the kernel uses identity-mapping page tables at this point. These page tables map 1:1 the first four gigabytes of memory. On the other hand, the kernel is linked to the high memory virtual addresses starting from the `0xffffffff80000000` address. In this case, any absolute address reference would cause a [page fault](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Page_fault) which the kernel is not ready to handle yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is done to prevent the compiler from generating any absolute address references. As you can remember from the last parts of the previous chapter, the kernel uses identity-mapping page tables at this point. These page tables map 1:1 the first four gigabytes of memory. On the other hand, the kernel is linked to the high memory virtual addresses starting from the `0xffffffff80000000` address. In this case, any absolute address reference would cause a [page fault](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Page_fault), which the kernel is not ready to handle yet.
```

> Now that we know where the new GDT is loaded, let's take a look at the `startup_64_setup_gdt_idt` function. It does the three following things:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we know where the new GDT is loaded, let's take a look at the `startup_64_setup_gdt_idt` function. It does the following things:
```

	 * Also sysret mandates a special GDT layout
	 *
	 * TLS descriptors are currently at a different place compared to i386.
	 * Hopefully nobody expects them at a fixed place (Wine?)
	 */
	[GDT_ENTRY_KERNEL32_CS]		= GDT_ENTRY_INIT(DESC_CODE32, 0, 0xfffff),
	[GDT_ENTRY_KERNEL_CS]		= GDT_ENTRY_INIT(DESC_CODE64, 0, 0xfffff),
	[GDT_ENTRY_KERNEL_DS]		= GDT_ENTRY_INIT(DESC_DATA64, 0, 0xfffff),
	[GDT_ENTRY_DEFAULT_USER32_CS]	= GDT_ENTRY_INIT(DESC_CODE32 | DESC_USER, 0, 0xfffff),
	[GDT_ENTRY_DEFAULT_USER_DS]	= GDT_ENTRY_INIT(DESC_DATA64 | DESC_USER, 0, 0xfffff),
	[GDT_ENTRY_DEFAULT_USER_CS]	= GDT_ENTRY_INIT(DESC_CODE64 | DESC_USER, 0, 0xfffff),
```

With the new Global Descriptor Table in place, the kernel reloads the code segment register to use the `__KERNEL_CS` selector from the new GDT:

<!-- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/torvalds/linux/refs/heads/master/arch/x86/kernel/head_64.S#L77-L80 -->
```assembly
	pushq	$__KERNEL_CS
	leaq	.Lon_kernel_cs(%rip), %rax
	pushq	%rax
	lretq
```

This code is more comfortable to read from the end. The `lretq` instruction pops two values from the stack:

- The first into `rip` register
- The second into `cs` register

> After execution, the CPU continues at `.Lon_kernel_cs` symbol which is located right after the `lretq` instruction, ensuring the kernel is running with the correct code segment from its own GDT.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After execution, the CPU continues at `.Lon_kernel_cs` symbol, which is located right after the `lretq` instruction, ensuring the kernel is running with the correct code segment from its own GDT.
```

## Switching to the kernel page tables

> [!NOTE]
> The code in this section also handles [5-level paging](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intel_5-level_paging) and [AMD Secure Memory Encryption](https://developer.amd.com/sev/). We will not cover these topics here to keep things focused on the core page table setup.

> The next big step after the GDT setup is to adjust the page tables. This is one of the most critical parts of the early initialization. The kernel needs to build page tables that map it at its high virtual address, create a temporary identity mapping so that switching to the new page tables does not cause a page fault, and then perform the switch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next big step after the GDT setup is to adjust the page tables. This is one of the most critical parts of the early initialization, where the kernel needs to:

- Build page tables that map it at its high virtual address
- Create a temporary identity mapping so that switching to the new page tables does not cause a page fault
- Perform the switch
```

### Page tables and the kernel address space

> Before we dive in, a quick reminder about the Linux kernel x86_64 page table hierarchy. To translate a virtual address to the corresponding physical address, the CPU walks through up to four levels of page tables:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before we dive in, a quick reminder about the Linux kernel x86_64 page table hierarchy. To translate a virtual address to the corresponding physical address, the CPU goes through up to four levels of page tables:
```

- PGD - Page Global Directory
- PUD - Page Upper Directory
- PMD - Page Middle Directory
- PTE - Page Table Entry

Modern Linux kernel actually defines a fifth level called P4D (Page Level 4 Directory), which sits between the PGD and the PUD. This level is used when 5-level paging is enabled, extending the virtual address space from `2^48` to `2^57` bytes. But most systems today still use 4-level paging, so you may wonder what happens to this extra level? This is where the kernel uses a trick called `page table folding`. When 5-level paging is disabled, the P4D level is folded into the PGD. The kernel defines `p4d_t` as a wrapper around `pgd_t`:

<!-- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/torvalds/linux/refs/heads/master/include/asm-generic/pgtable-nop4d.h#L9-L9 -->
```C
typedef struct { pgd_t pgd; } p4d_t;
```

> The kernel can also use 2 MB or so-called large pages that stop at the PMD level, skipping the PTE level entirely. This is what the early kernel page tables use. In the code below, you will see how the kernel builds these page tables:

Reviewer: I expected to see some code there, not bullet points:

<img width="1003" height="170" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ec06f73a-bba8-437d-9c31-0f0f475f12de" />

- `early_top_pgt` - PGD
- `level3_kernel_pgt` - PUD
- `level2_kernel_pgt` - PMD

After this short reminder, let's take a small step back and think about why the kernel needs to rebuild its page tables at all. To understand this, we need to know where the kernel is right now and where it should be.

At this point, the kernel is running with the page tables that were set up by the decompressor code. These are simple identity-mapped page tables, meaning that a virtual address maps directly to the same physical address. These page tables were enough to get the kernel through decompression and the first few instructions of `startup_64`. Traditionally, the kernel code is physically loaded somewhere in low memory, except when the bootloader chooses another location, and the decompressor's page tables map exactly that region.

But this is not where the kernel is supposed to be mapped. On x86_64, the virtual address space is huge - `2^47` bytes with 4-level paging, and it is split into two halves:

> - The lower half which covers addresses starting from `0x0` belongs to user-space processes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The lower half, which covers addresses starting from `0x0`, belongs to user-space processes
```

- The upper half is the kernel's address space

> This region where kernel is mapped is usually called `high memory`. This is where the linker places all kernel symbols when `vmlinux` is built. We can verify this with `readelf`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This region where the kernel is mapped is usually called `high memory`. This is where the linker places all kernel symbols when `vmlinux` is built. We can verify this with `readelf`:
```

```bash
readelf -S vmlinux | grep "  \[ 1\] \.text"
  [ 1] .text             PROGBITS         ffffffff81000000  00200000
```

> The whole virtual memory map of the Linux kernel for x86_64 can be found in the [Documentation/arch/x86/x86_64/mm.rst](https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/master/Documentation/arch/x86/x86_64/mm.rst) document. I know. This table can look intimidating at first glance but do not worry. We will refer back to specific regions of memory as they become relevant. For now, we are interested only in the last few entries at the very bottom of the table which describes the kernel code mapping areas:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find the whole virtual memory map of the Linux kernel for x86_64 in the [Documentation/arch/x86/x86_64/mm.rst](https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/master/Documentation/arch/x86/x86_64/mm.rst) document. I know. This table can look intimidating at first glance, but do not worry. We will refer back to specific regions of memory as they become relevant. For now, we are interested only in the last few entries at the very bottom of the table, which describe the kernel code mapping areas:
```

> | Start addr       | Offset    | End addr         | Size    | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                              |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Start address       | Offset    | End address         | Size    | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
```

Reviewer: Is this table a copy-paste from somewhere?

| ffffffffa0000000 | -1536 MB  | fffffffffeffffff | 1520 MB | module mapping space                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| FIXADDR_START    | ~-11 MB   | ffffffffff5fffff | ~0.5 MB | kernel-internal fixmap range, variable size and offset                                                                                                                                                                   |
| ffffffffff600000 | -10 MB    | ffffffffff600fff | 4 kB    | legacy vsyscall ABI                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| ffffffffffe00000 | -2 MB     | ffffffffffffffff | 2 MB    | ... unused hole                                                                                                                                                                                                          |

> Every function, every global variable in the kernel was linked to run at these high addresses. But our current page tables know nothing about this memory region since they cover only the low memory range. If the kernel tried to jump to its linked address right now, the CPU would trigger a page fault because there is no page table entry for it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every function and every global variable in the kernel was linked to run at these high addresses. But our current page tables know nothing about this memory region since they cover only the low memory range. If the kernel tried to jump to its linked address right now, the CPU would trigger a page fault because there is no page table entry for it.
```

This is the main reason the kernel must build new page tables. Let's visualize what we have now versus what we will have.

The current page tables from the decompressor look like this:

![early-page-tables](./images/early-page-tables.svg)

> After this, the new page tables will look like this:

Reviewer: After what?
